Add Tests and Demos about "Sensitive Data Stored Unencrypted via DataStore" (#3540)
OWASP/mastg: tests-beta/android/MASVS-STORAGE/MASTG-TEST-0308.md

---
platform: android
title: Runtime Verification of Sensitive Data Stored Unencrypted in DataStore
id: MASTG-TEST-0308
type: [dynamic, filesysttem]
weakness: MASWE-0006
best-practices: [MASTG-BEST-0025]
profiles: [L2]
status: new
---

## Overview

This test checks at runtime whether sensitive data — tokens, passwords, or PII — is stored in DataStore files in plaintext. The goal is to verify that sensitive information is not left unencrypted in the app's sandbox.

## Steps

> 1. Install and run the app on a rooted or emulated device (@MASTG-TECH-0005).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Starting a device is not anymore needed for the tests.

> 2. Trigger app functionality that processes or stores sensitive data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Exercise all the functionalities of the app that process or store sensitive data.
```

> 3. Access the app's private storage (typically `/data/data/<package_name>/datastore/`) to locate DataStore files:
>    - `.preferences_pb` (Preferences DataStore)
>    - `.proto` (Proto DataStore)
>    (@MASTG-TECH-0008)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Access the app's private storage (@MASTG-TECH-0008) to locate DataStore files (normally at `/data/data/<package_name>/datastore/`):
   - `.preferences_pb` (Preferences DataStore)
   - `.proto` (Proto DataStore)
```

> 4. Extract the DataStore files to the host machine using @MASTG-TECH-0003.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Extract the DataStore files of the app to the host machine (@MASTG-TECH-0002).
```

Reviewer: MASTG-TECH-0003 is about dumping the APK, but not their associated storage files.

> 5. Inspect file contents using dynamic analysis techniques (@MASTG-TECH-0015) to determine whether sensitive data is stored in plaintext.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Inspect the database content to determine if sensitive data is stored in plaintext.
```

Reviewer: There is not a 1:1 TECH for this step, it's better to just enforce that the databases must be inspected.

>    _Note: Proto DataStore files require a Proto decoder for inspection._

Reviewer: It would be fine if we create a MASTG-TOOL for this purpose, I think there is not such tool right now.

Reviewer: If you don't want to create the MASTG-TOOL file, you can create an issue (like this one https://github.com/OWASP/mastg/issues/3728) so that we have it tracked.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I'll create an issue to keep track of it. If it doesn't get picked up by someone else and I find the time, I'll take a stab at implementing the tool myself.

## Observation

- Which DataStore files exist on the device.

> - Whether sensitive data (tokens, secrets, PII) is present in plaintext or easily reversible format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Occurrences inside the DataStore file where the sensitive data (tokens, secrets, PII) is stored in plaintext.
```

## Evaluation

> The test fails if sensitive data is stored in DataStore files without encryption and can be read in plaintext through static or dynamic analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test fails if sensitive data is stored in DataStore files without encryption and can be read in plaintext.
```
